Code of conduct template set (#246)
thegooddocsproject/templates: code-of-conduct/guide-code-of-conduct.md

# Code of Conduct template guide

---
Thank you for downloading the Code of Conduct template from The Good Docs Project!
We welcome any kind of feedback on our templates, both positive and negative.

> To suggest improvements, open an issue on our (https://github.com/thegooddocsproject/templates/issues)[Templates repository].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To suggest improvements, open an issue on our [Templates repository](https://github.com/thegooddocsproject/templates/issues).

```

Author: Adopted.

---

This is the guide that explains how to use the Good Docs Project Code of Conduct, which is part of the Code of Conduct template set.

> The Code of Conduct template set includes:

Reviewer: I reviewed the CoC template first. Please see my comments on this section in that document, because I think they apply here too.

Author: I've made them identical. Thanks!

- A `template-code-of conduct.md` file that you can use to create your community's public-facing Code of Conduct.
- A `template-code-of-conduct-response-plan.md` file that you can use to create and explain the response policy and procedures your team will follow as you handle Code of Conduct incidents. This template is included in the same folder as the Code of Conduct template.

> - A `template-code-of-conduct-incident-record.md` file for a form that is filled out when a community moderator takes an incident report from a community members. This template is included in the same folder as the Code of Conduct template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A `template-code-of-conduct-incident-record.md` file for a form that is filled out when a community moderator takes an incident report from a community member. This template is included in the same folder as the Code of Conduct template.

```

Author: Thanks for that copy paste error catch again!

- A `template-code-of-conduct-remediation-record.md` file for a form that is filled out when a community moderator meets with a community member to explain the consequences of a Code of Conduct violation. This template is included in the same folder as the Code of Conduct template.
- The following guides:
  - `guide-code-of-conduct.md`
  - `guide-code-of-conduct-response-plan.md`
  - `guide-code-of-conduct-incident-record.md`
  - `guide-code-of-conduct-remediation-record`

You might also consider using the `../our-team/template-our-team.md` template to let your community members know who they can contact to report a Code of Conduct violation. This document is not only necessary for Code of Conduct violations. It is a core document that helps you clearly communicate who belongs to your open source project or organization.

## Why do I need a Code of Conduct and a response plan?

> A Code of Conduct is a lot like a good insurance policy: hopefully you won't have to use it because your community will always be healthy, productive, and inclusive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Code of Conduct is a lot like a good insurance policy: hopefully you'll never have to use it.

```
Alternative suggested wording. Feel free to reject. It's stronger without the "because" phrase. Also, playing devil's advocate, we don't want to assume what people's CoC is going to prescribe. Maybe they want a productive community, but not necessarily an inclusive one.

Reviewer 2: suggestion: I am not sure if I agree with this analogy. Code of conduct is a set of rules, principles, standards that you expect the members of the community of follow. It establishes the culture of the organization. A good company will definitely have a CoC stated upfront. You can only expect that the members of the community do not violate the code of conduct and you may never have to use the incident report/redressal mechanism. These are just my thoughts.

Author: Adopted.

I agree with you Gayathri. Hopefully the text immediately following that explains the points you're trying to make.

However, if or when a problem occurs in your community, you'll be glad that your Code of Conduct is there to support you.

A Code of Conduct has many purposes and benefits. It can:

- Help you define and clearly communicate your organization's mission, values, and guiding principles.
- Encourage members of your community to behave ethically and inclusively.
- Make your community a better place to collaborate and work.

> - Demonstrate to prospective community members that your community is one that is welcoming and safe to join.

Reviewer 2: nitpick: Can we rephrase it as? Demonstrate to prospective community members that your community is warm, welcoming, and safe to join.

Author: Sure! I've adopted this suggestion.

But it's not enough to merely have a Code of Conduct.
You should also have a clear plan for how your team will respond if a Code of Conduct incident occurs.
Your response plan should include important details, such as:

- How incidents are reported and documented.

> - Who will recieve and handle Code of Conduct incidents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Who will receive and handle Code of Conduct incidents.

```

Author: Adopted.

- How incidents are investigated and resolved.
- How you will handle appeals or potential conflicts of interest.

When you have a well-defined Code of Conduct response plan in addition to a Code of Conduct, it demonstrates that your community takes its ethical responsibilities seriously.

> It means that you are willing to do more than simply talk about your community values: you will actively live by them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It means that you are willing to do more than simply talk about your community values - you will actively live by them.

```

Author: Probably not going to adopt this suggestion. My use of a colon was intentional here. I could be persuaded to do a semicolon, possibly?

Hopefully, as you create your Code of Conduct and your response plan, your community's leaders will have many important conversations about your community values and you will carefully think through the logistics of promoting and upholding those values in your community.

## Maintenance strategy

A Code of Conduct is considered a foundational document for a healthy open source community.

> For that reason, it is important to review your Code of Conduct and your response plan regularly to make sure it hasn't gone stale and meets your community's needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For that reason, it is important to review your Code of Conduct and your response plan regularly to make sure it hasn't gone stale and still meets your community's needs.

```

Author: Adopted.

> If you do have a Code of Conduct incident, consider holding a retrospective meeting shortly after resolving a Code of Conduct incident to make sure your Code of Conduct and response plan was effective.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you do have a Code of Conduct incident, consider holding a retrospective meeting shortly after resolving the incident to make sure your Code of Conduct and response plan was effective.

```

In addition to retrospectives, consider reviewing your Code of Conduct and your response plan on a yearly basis at least.
An annual review can also be a good time to check that each community moderator is familiar with your Code of Conduct policies and that they have been sufficiently trained in handling Code of Conduct incidents.
Ensure that someone in your community is responsible for ensuring the Code of Conduct is reviewed regularly.

> If your community uses a calendar, add an event to your calendar to remind you to do the yearly review.

Reviewer: The third paragraph in this section repeats the second sentence of the first paragraph. 
One suggestion would be to move the annual review stuff up to the first para. Or, have it all in the third para. 
I don't think you need the "in addition".
```suggestion
In addition to retrospectives, consider reviewing your Code of Conduct and your response plan on a yearly basis at least.
An annual review can also be a good time to check that each community moderator is familiar with your Code of Conduct policies and that they have been sufficiently trained in handling Code of Conduct incidents.
Ensure that someone in your community is responsible for ensuring the Code of Conduct is reviewed regularly.
If your community uses a calendar, add an event to your calendar to remind you to do the yearly review.

```

## Content of the Code of Conduct template

The following sections provide guidance about how to fill out each section of the Code of Conduct template.

:information_source: The Code of Conduct template includes boilerplate text that you can customize or adapt, use as-is, or completely replace with your own text. If you use the boilerplate text, make sure you replace the project name placeholders with your own project name.

> ### About the "Opening statment of purpose" section

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### About the "Opening statement of purpose" section

```

Author: Weird. My spellcheck must not have been working when I did this file. It does that sometimes.

The first section in the template is where you'll put your opening statement of purpose.
Your opening statement should include information about your core values and the purpose of your Code of Conduct.

### About the "Expected behavior" section

> An effective Code of Conduct can help your community feel more warm and welcoming if it starts with a section outlining the positive, pro-social behaviors you'd like to see in your community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An effective Code of Conduct can help your community feel more warm and welcoming if it starts with a section outlining the positive, prosocial behaviors you'd like to see in your community.

```
suggestion: no hyphen. The CoC template uses "reword" (no hyphen), so if this is a 50/50 hyphen/no hyphen situation, we should go with no hyphen.

Author: Adopted.

> An effective Code of Conduct can help your community feel more warm and welcoming if it starts with a section outlining the positive, pro-social behaviors you'd like to see in your community.

Reviewer: This sentence confuses me. It feels like it's saying something different to the next sentence. But there's nothing in the template itself I can marry back to it. I suspect it's saying the same thing as the second sentence, which makes me want to remove it. As a reader, looking at the template simultaneously, I want the first sentence in this section to be something like "In the *Expected behavior* section, you can describe the specific behaviors blah blah blah." and then maybe can you say "This information is best presented as a list". ??

Question: Is this section optional, since I think we're saying the "Not tolerated" section is mandatory.

In the *Expected behavior* section, you can list the specific behaviors and attitudes that best support the ethical values you mentioned in your opening statement.

### About the "Behavior that will not be tolerated" section

> The *Behavior that will not be tolerated* section is extremely important, so you should definitely include this section in your final draft.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *Behavior that will not be tolerated* section is extremely important, so you should definitely include it.

```
Is this how we normally articulate required sections of a template? 
Don't we just have a "required/optional" marker preceding each section? I'd have to look this up...

Reviewer 2: If a section is optional, we state it else it is assumed it is mandatory.

This section should include:

- Instructions or links for reporting a Code of Conduct incident, such as a link to your Code of Conduct response plan.
- A list of the possible consequences that could result from a Code of Conduct violation.
- A statement indicating that compliance is necessary.

### About the "Reporting an incident" section

The *Reporting an incident* section should include clear instructions for reporting Code of Conduct violations.
In this section, try to communicate that your moderators are approachable and that you encourage community members to reach out, even if they're not sure if the incident is a violation or not.
Not all community members necessarily want to file an official report and may instead just want to discuss their concerns in private.

### About the "Addressing Code of Conduct reports" section

In this section, include a general statement about how Code of Conduct reports will be handled and adjudicated.
This section could include:

- A statement that complaints will be reviewed and investigated promptly and fairly.
- A privacy policy.
- The appeals process

> - A notice that an internal record will be kept for all incidents.

Reviewer: It may be beyond this template (and apologies if it's in a document in this set that I haven't reviewed yet) but it occurs to me that we might want to prompt folks to have a policy for where they store the records. If we give a hint in the maintenance section about adding a calendar event, then it seems fitting to give a hint here about the team making a decision about where to store records, and how to make them secure & private, etc.
